Extended reality (XR) is a catch-all term to refer to augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and mixed reality (MR) that was introduced in 1991 and is specifically defined as "a unifying concept to interpolate between the realities and to eXtrapolate beyond them".
The technology is intended to combine or mirror the physical world with a "digital twin world" able to interact with it. Giving users an immersive experience by being in a virtual or augmented environment. 
The fields of virtual reality and augmented reality are rapidly growing and being applied in a wide range of areas such as entertainment, cinema, marketing, real estate, training, education, maintenance and remote work.Extended reality has the ability to be used for joint effort in the workplace, training, educational purposes, therapeutic treatments, and data exploration and analysis.
Extended reality works by using visual data acquisition that is either accessed locally or shared and transfers over a network and to the human senses. By enabling real-time responses in a virtual stimulus these devices create customized experiences. Advancing in 5G and edge computing – a type of computing that is done "at or near the source of data" – could aid in data rates, increase user capacity, and reduce latency. These applications will likely expand extended reality into the future.
Around one-third of the global extended reality market is attributed to Europe.



Computer-mediated reality
Head-mounted display
On-set virtual production
OpenXR
Smartglasses
Virtual reality
Wearable computing



Vinod Baya; Erik Sherman. "The road ahead for augmented reality". pwc.
Pereira, Fernando. "Deep Learning-Based Extended Reality: Making Humans and Machines Speak the Same Visual Language." In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Interactive eXtended Reality, 1–2. IXR ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1145/3552483.3555366.
United States Government Accountability Office. Extended Reality Technologies. Science & Tech Spotlight. Washington, D.C: GAO, Science, Technology Assessment, and Analytics, 2022.
Boel, Carl, Kim Dekeyser, Fien Depaepe, Luis Quintero, Tom van Daele, and Brenda Wiederhold. Extended Reality: Opportunities, Success Stories and Challenges (Health, Education) : Executive Summary. Luxembourg: Publications Office, 2023. https://op.europa.eu/publication/manifestation_identifier/PUB_KK0722997ENN.
Sayler, Kelley M. "Military Applications of Extended Reality." IF 12010. Washington, D.C: Congressional Research Service, 2022.